DanBri ETCON-2004 abstract

version: $Id: abstract.txt,v 1.1 2003-09-24 17:47:26 danbri Exp $

45 min  talk at http://conferences.oreillynet.com/cs/et2004/create/e_sess#form

  "Fear of a FOAF Planet - Acronyms and Antics on the Semantic Web"

  The Friend of a Friend (FOAF) project is about creating a Web of machine-readable 
  homepages describing people, the links between them and the things they create and  
  do. This session introduces the Friend of a Friend (FOAF) project, giving 
  a lightning tour of its origins, goals, current status and possible futures. 

Many of the interesting characteristics of FOAF stem from the 
W3C "Semantic Web" standards which underpin it; relevant acronyms 
and their role will be introduced explained accordingly.
FOAF explores many of the technical and social issues highlighted by the 
emergent Semantic Web, but the focus here is not on the core technology, but on 
how FOAF and related trends might impact our lives, offline and on. 

What would happen (to privacy, to the media, to commerce) if search engines evolved 
into aggregating databases? What would happen if machines could exchange, 
merge and reason about descriptions of people using standards-based, freely 
available tools? What should we do as these 'ifs' become 'whens'?

FOAF's use of W3C RDF technology guarantees a certain freedom of expression - 
FOAF documents can contain extra markup that brings extra precision to 
to descriptions of people, places, events, relationships. The full 
ramifications of this freedom may not be understood for years to come. 

FOAF has many possible futures. This survey outlines several: 
utopian, dystopian, and the spaces in between. The overview will 
focus on real world FOAF tools and applications currently in development,  including 
FOAFMobile apps ("show me weblog articles by people sat near me right now") 
and interactions between social networking, activism and indy media ("show me 
the sweatshop where this t-shirt was made", "I'd like to talk to a FOAF who has 
been to Iraq...").

Modest technologies can have unexpected consequences. As a simple, mischievous 
technology designed to encourage coincidences, FOAF opens up many possibilities. 
As we move towards the mainstream, we must balance wide-eyed techno-optimism 
with more sober assessments of the risk such technologies create.

The Web is already mutating into the "Semantic" Web. FOAF is both as a driver 
for such change, and a readily accessible tool for understanding, 
adapting to and participating in this changed world. While FOAF is in essence a tool 
for describing and modeling the world, it is often hard to describe something 
without changing it.
